# NDK Roadmap

**Note**: If there's anything you want to see done in the NDK, [file a bug]!
Nothing here is set in stone, and if there's something that we haven't thought
of that would be of more use, we'd be happy to adjust our plans for that.

[file a bug]: https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/issues

**Disclaimer**: Everything here is subject to change. The further the plans are
in the future, the less stable they will be. Things in the upcoming release are
fairly certain, and the second release is quite likely. Beyond that, anything
written here is what we would like to accomplish in that release assuming things
have gone according to plan until then.

**Note**: For release timing, see our [release schedule] on our wiki.

[release schedule]: https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/wiki#release-schedule

---

## Regular maintenance

Every NDK release aims to include a new toolchain, new headers, and a new
version of libc++.

We also maintain [hotlists](https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/milestones)
of the bugs we intend to fix in any given NDK release.

### Toolchain updates

The NDK and the Android OS use the same toolchain. Android's toolchain team is
constantly working on updating to the latest upstream LLVM for the OS. It can
take a long time to investigate issues when compiling -- or issues that the
newer compiler finds in -- OS code or OEM code, for all 4 supported
architectures, so these updates usually take a few months.

Even then, a new OS toolchain may not be good enough for the NDK. In the OS, we
can work around compiler bugs by changing our code, but for the NDK we want to
make compiler updates cause as little disruption as possible. We also don't want
to perform a full compiler update late in the NDK release cycle for the sake of
stability.

The aim is that each NDK will have a new toolchain that's as up to date as
feasible without sacrificing stability, but we err on the side of stability when
we have to make a choice. If an NDK release doesn't include a new compiler, or
that compiler isn't as new as you'd hoped, trust us --- you wouldn't want
anything newer that we have just yet!

## Current work

Most of the team's work is currently focused outside the NDK proper, so while
the NDK release notes may seem a bit sparse, there are still plenty of
improvements coming for NDK users:

* Providing package management for the NDK (see the
  [Package management](#package-management) section below).
* Improving NDK and Android Gradle Plugin documentation.
* Improving the OS (in particular the linker).
* Getting an up to date LLDB for Android Studio. We'll be adding LLDB support to
  ndk-gdb after this is done.
* Working with the Android frameworks teams to get new NDK APIs.

### Package management

There are many other commonly-used libraries (such as cURL and OpenSSL) that are
currently difficult to build/package, let alone keep updated. We have built:

* [ndkports] for managing Android builds of open source projects.
* [Prefab] for generating ndk-build/CMake integration (or any other build
  system via plugins) for AARs generated by [ndkports].

Most of the current work related to this is going in to populating a corpus of
libraries for apps to use. OpenSSL, cURL, and jsoncpp will be the first batch,
but we'll be adding more in time. See the open [package requests] on the Prefab
bug tracker for the current wishlist.

For more information, see [Issue 916].

[Issue 916]: https://github.com/android/ndk/issues/916
[Prefab]: https://google.github.io/prefab/
[ndkports]: https://android.googlesource.com/platform/tools/ndkports/
[package requests]: https://github.com/google/prefab/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22package+request%22

## Future work

The following projects are listed in order of their current priority.

Note that some of these projects do not actually affect the contents of the NDK
package. The samples, documentation, etc are all NDK work but are separate from
the NDK package. As such they will not appear in any specific release, but are
noted here to show where the team's time is being spent.

### C++ File System API

[Issue 609](https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/issues/609)

We don't currently build, test, or ship libc++'s `std::filesystem`.

There's a fair amount of work involved in getting these tests running. Some of
the work has already been done, but there's still more to be done for supporting
older OS versions.

### CMake

CMake added their own NDK support about the same time we added our
toolchain file. The two often conflict with each other, and a toolchain
file is a messy way to implement this support. However, fully switching to
the integrated support puts NDK policy decisions (default options, NDK layout,
etc) fully into the hands of CMake, which makes them impossible to update
without the user also updating their CMake version.

We will reorganize our toolchain file to match the typical implementation of a
CMake platform integration (like `$CMAKE/Modules/Platform/Android-*.cmake`) and
CMake will be modified to load the implementation from the NDK rather than its
own.

See [Issue 463](https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/issues/463) for discussion.

### Default to lld

NDK r18 [made lld available](https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/issues/683),
r20 made it more usable, and a future release will make it the default once
all the issues that turn up are resolved.

### Remove gold and bfd

Once we've switched the default to lld and no major issues remain,
we should remove gold and bfd.

### lldb debugger

We should make lldb available in the NDK. It's currently shipped as part
of Studio. Medium-term we should have Studio ship our lldb. Long-term Studio
should probably use the NDK lldb directly.

---

## Unscheduled Work

The following projects are things we intend to do, but have not yet been
sheduled into the sections above.

### Better documentation

We should probably add basic doc comments to the bionic headers:

* One-sentence summary.
* One paragraph listing any Android differences. (Perhaps worth upstreaming this
  to man7.org too.)
* Explain any "flags" arguments (at least giving some idea of which flags)?
* Explain the return value: what does a `char*` point to? Who owns it? Are
  errors -1 (as for most functions) or `<errno.h>` values (for
  `pthread_mutex_lock`)?
* A "See also" pointing to man7.org?

Should these be in the NDK API reference too? If so, how will we keep
them from swamping the "real" NDK API?

vim is ready, Android Studio now supports doxygen comments (but seems
to have gained a new man page viewer that takes precedence),
and Visual Studio Code has nothing but feature requests.

Beyond writing the documentation, we also should invest some time in improving
the presentation of the NDK API reference on developer.android.com.

### Better samples

The samples are low-quality and don't necessarily cover interesting/difficult
topics.

### Better tools for improving code quality

The NDK has long included `gtest` and clang supports various sanitiziers,
but there are things we can do to improve the state of testing/code quality:

* Test coverage support.
* Add `gmock`.
* Make [GTestJNI] available to developers via Maven so developers can integrate
  their C++ tests into Studio.

[GTestJNI]: https://github.com/danalbert/GTestJNI

### C++ wrappers for NDK APIs

NDK APIs are C-only for ABI stability reasons.

We should offer C++ wrappers as part of an NDK support library (possibly as part
of JetPack), even if only to offer the benefits of RAII.  Examples include
[Bitmap](https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/issues/822),
[ATrace](https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/issues/821), and
[ASharedMemory](https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/issues/820).

### JNI helpers

Complaints about basic JNI handling are common. We should make libnativehelper
available as an AAR.

### NDK icu4c wrapper

For serious i18n, `icu4c` is too big too bundle, and non-trivial to use
the platform. We have a C API wrapper prototype, but we need to make it
easily available for NDK users.

### More automated libc++ updates

We still need to update libc++ twice: once for the platform, and once
for the NDK. We also still have two separate test runners.

### Weak symbols for API additions

iOS developers are used to using weak symbols to refer to function that
may be present in their equivalent of `targetSdkVersion` but not in their
`minSdkVersion`. We could potentially do something similar. See
[issue 1003](https://github.com/android-ndk/ndk/issues/1003).

### C++ Modules

By Q2 2019 Clang may have a complete enough implementation of the modules TS and
Android may have a Clang with those changes available.

At least for the current spec (which is in the process of merging with the Clang
implementation, so could change), the NDK will need to:

 1. Support compiling module interfaces.
 2. Support either automated discovery (currently very messy) or specification
    of module dependencies.
 3. Begin creating module interfaces for system libraries. Frameworks, libc,
    libc++, etc.

---

## Historical releases

Full [history] is available, but this section summarizes major changes
in recent releases.

[history]: https://developer.android.com/ndk/downloads/revision_history.html

### NDK r21 LTS

Updated Clang, LLD, libc++, make, and GDB. Much better LLD behavior on Windows.
32-bit Windows support removed. Neon by default for all API levels. OpenMP now
available as both a static and shared library.

### NDK r20

Updated Clang and libc++, added Q APIs. Improved out-of-the-box Clang behavior.

### NDK r19

Reorganized the toolchain packaging and modified Clang so that standalone
toolchains are now unnecessary. Clang can now be invoked directly from its
installed location in the NDK.

C++ compilation defaults to C++14.

### NDK r18

Removed GCC and gnustl/stlport. Added lld.

Added `compile_commands.json` for better tooling support.

### NDK r17

Defaulted to libc++.

Removed ARMv5 (armeabi), MIPS, and MIPS64.

### NDK r16

Fixed libandroid\_support, libc++ now the recommended STL (but still
not the default).

Removed non-unified headers.

### NDK r15

Defaulted to [unified headers] (opt-out).

Removed support for API levels lower than 14 (Android 4.0).

### NDK r14

Added [unified headers] (opt-in).

[unified headers]: https://android.googlesource.com/platform/ndk/+/master/docs/UnifiedHeaders.md

### NDK r13

Added [simpleperf].

[simpleperf]: https://developer.android.com/ndk/guides/simpleperf.html

### NDK r12

Removed [armeabi-v7a-hard].

Removed support for API levels lower than 9 (Android 2.3).

[armeabi-v7a-hard]: https://android.googlesource.com/platform/ndk/+/ndk-r12-release/docs/HardFloatAbi.md
